CS40L20/CS40L25/CS40L25A/CS40L25B Boosted Haptics Driver

Required properties:

  - compatible : One of "cirrus,cs40l20", "cirrus,cs40l25", "cirrus,cs40l25a"
    or "cirrus,cs40l25b".

  - reg : The I2C slave address of the device.

  - VA-supply, VP-supply : Regulators for the device's VA and VP supplies,
    respectively. See the following:
    Documentation/devicetree/bindings/regulator/regulator.txt

  - cirrus,boost-ind-nanohenry : Boost inductor value, expressed in nH. Valid
    values include 1000, 1200, 1500 and 2200.

  - cirrus,boost-cap-microfarad : Total equivalent boost capacitance on the VBST
    and VAMP pins, derated at 11 volts DC (or the voltage specified by the
    boost-ctl-millivolt property, if present). The value must be rounded to the
    nearest integer and expressed in uF.

  - cirrus,boost-ipk-milliamp : Boost inductor peak current, expressed in mA.
    Valid values range from 1600 to 4500 (inclusive) in steps of 50.

Optional properties:

  - reset-gpios : GPIO used for resetting the device.

  - interrupt-parent : Single phandle representing the interrupt controller to
    which the /ALERT pin is connected (silicon revision B1 only). Auxiliary
    Serial Port (ASP) support (CS40L25A only) requires the /ALERT pin to be
    used.

  - interrupts : interrupt specifiers for the device (silicon revision B1 only).
    See the following:
    Documentation/devicetree/bindings/interrupt-controller/interrupts.txt

  - cirrus,refclk-gpio2 : Boolean for configuring the device to expect its
    32.768-kHz reference clock on the REFCLK/GPIO2 pin. If this property is
    omitted, the device expects its 32.768-kHz reference clock on the
    ASP_BCLK/REFCLK pin. This property is ignored for silicon revision B1 as
    reference clock selection is configured automatically in that case.

  - cirrus,f0-default : Default LRA resonant frequency (f0), expressed as
    follows: cirrus,f0-default = f0 (Hz) * 2^14. This value represents the
    frequency used during playback of PWLE segments specified with frequency
    equal to f0; it also serves as the unit-specific f0 input to the click
    compensation algorithm. It can be overwritten at a later time by writing
    to the f0_stored sysfs control.

    If this value is omitted or specified as zero in the presence of silicon
    revisions A0 or B0, the measurement recorded in the f0_measured sysfs
    control is used. In that case, if LRA diagnostics has not been administered
    and f0_measured is uninitialized, 2621440 (160 Hz) is used.

    If this value is omitted or specified as zero in the presence of silicon
    revision B1, 2621440 (160 Hz) is used irrespective of the measurement
    recorded in the f0_measured sysfs control.

  - cirrus,f0-min : Minimum LRA resonant frequency (f0) that may be written to
    the f0_stored sysfs control, expressed using the same numerical format as
    cirrus,f0-default. If this value is omitted or specified as zero, no lower-
    bound validation is performed.

  - cirrus,f0-max : Maximum LRA resonant frequency (f0) that may be written to
    the f0_stored sysfs control, expressed using the same numerical format as
    cirrus,f0-default. If this value is omitted or specified as zero, no upper-
    bound validation is performed.

  - cirrus,redc-default : Default LRA series resistance (ReDC), expressed as
    follows: cirrus,redc-default = ReDC (ohms) / 5.857 * 2^17. This value
    represents the unit-specific ReDC input to the click compensation algorithm.
    It can be overwritten at a later time by writing to the redc_stored sysfs
    control.

    If this value is omitted or specified as zero in the presence of silicon
    revisions A0 or B0, the measurement recorded in the redc_measured sysfs
    control is used. In that case, if LRA diagnostics has not been administered
    and redc_measured is uninitialized, 340787 (15.2 ohms) is used.

    If this value is omitted or specified as zero in the presence of silicon
    revision B1, 340787 (15.2 ohms) is used irrespective of the measurement
    recorded in the redc_measured sysfs control.

  - cirrus,redc-min : Minimum LRA series resistance (ReDC) that may be written
    to the redc_stored sysfs control, expressed using the same numerical format
    as cirrus,redc-default. If this value is omitted or specified as zero, no
    lower-bound validation is performed.

  - cirrus,redc-max : Maximum LRA series resistance (ReDC) that may be written
    to the redc_stored sysfs control, expressed using the same numerical format
    as cirrus,redc-default. If this value is omitted or specified as zero, no
    upper-bound validation is performed.

  - cirrus,q-default : Default LRA Q factor (silicon revision B1 only),
    expressed as follows: cirrus,q-default = Q * 2^16. This value represents
    the unit-specific Q factor used to select the correct sub-waveform for
    Q-dependent wavetable indexes. It can be overwritten at a later time by
    writing to the q_stored sysfs control. If this value is omitted or specified
    as zero, a default value of 27 is used.

  - cirrus,q-min : Minimum LRA Q factor that may be written to the q_stored
    sysfs control (silicon revision B1 only), expressed using the same numerical
    format as cirrus,q-default. If this value is omitted or specified as zero,
    no lower-bound validation is performed.

  - cirrus,q-max : Maximum LRA Q factor that may be written to the q_stored
    sysfs control (silicon revision B1 only), expressed using the same numerical
    format as cirrus,q-default. If this value is omitted or specified as zero,
    no upper-bound validation is performed.

  - cirrus,redc-comp-disable : Boolean for disabling ReDC-based click
    compensation (silicon revision B1 only). If this property is omitted, ReDC-
    based click compensation remains enabled in the absence of the comp-disable
    property. ReDC-based click compensation can be enabled or disabled at a
    later time by writing 1 or 0 to the redc_comp_enable sysfs control,
    respectively. This property does not affect f0-based click compensation and
    its effect is overridden in the presence of the comp-disable property.

  - cirrus,comp-disable : Boolean for disabling both f0-based and ReDC-based
    click compensation. If this property is omitted, f0-based click compensation
    remains enabled and ReDC-based click compensation is enabled or disabled as
    a function of the redc-comp-disable property. Both f0-based and ReDC-based
    click compensation can be enabled or disabled at a later time by writing 1
    or 0 to the comp_enable sysfs control, respectively.

  - cirrus,dyn-f0-disable : Boolean for disabling dynamic F0 support
    (silicon revision B1 only). If this property is omitted, dynamic F0
    remains enabled in the absence of the dyn-f0-disable property.  If
    cs40l25a_f0.bin does not exist, then disabling dynamic F0 support is
    recommended.

  - cirrus,open-wt-disable : Boolean for disabling open wavetable support
    (silicon revision B1 only). If this property is omitted, open wavetable
    remains enabled in the absence of the open-wt-disable property. The open
    wavetable feature can only be disabled with this property due to the
    required adjustment of the wavetable during initialization.

  - cirrus,gpio1-rise-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO1
    rising edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO1 rising edges are mapped to
    index 1 (active-high polarity) or index 2 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO1 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio1-fall-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO1
    falling edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO1 falling edges are mapped to
    index 2 (active-high polarity) or index 1 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO1 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio1-fall-timeout : Specifies the number of 48-kHz periods for
    which the device remains in the active state in search of a GPIO1 falling
    edge, following a GPIO1 rising edge (the latter of which renders the device
    active). If a GPIO1 falling edge does not arrive within this timeout, the
    device automatically returns to the standby state and the subsequent GPIO1
    falling edge is ignored. If this value is omitted or exceeds the maximum
    timeout (8388607) then a default of 240000 is assumed (corresponding to
    240000 / 48000 = 5 seconds). If this value is specified as zero, the timeout
    is effectively disabled.

    The timeout specified for GPIO1 applies to any additional GPIO2, GPIO3 or
    GPIO4 pins enabled by cirrus,gpio-indv-enable.

    If cirrus,gpio-indv-pol specifies a pin as active low, the timeout instead
    follows a falling edge and specifies the time the device remains active in
    search of a subsequent rising edge. Rising edges that arrive following the
    timeout are ignored.

  - cirrus,gpio2-rise-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO2
    rising edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO2 rising edges are mapped to
    index 1 (active-high polarity) or index 2 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO2 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio2-fall-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO2
    falling edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO2 falling edges are mapped to
    index 2 (active-high polarity) or index 1 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO2 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio3-rise-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO3
    rising edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO3 rising edges are mapped to
    index 1 (active-high polarity) or index 2 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO3 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio3-fall-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO3
    falling edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO3 falling edges are mapped to
    index 2 (active-high polarity) or index 1 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO3 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio4-rise-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO4
    rising edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO4 rising edges are mapped to
    index 1 (active-high polarity) or index 2 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO4 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio4-fall-index : Specifies the wavetable index mapped to GPIO4
    falling edges. If this value is omitted, specified as zero or exceeds the
    maximum available index in the wavetable, GPIO4 falling edges are mapped to
    index 2 (active-high polarity) or index 1 (active-low polarity) based on
    cirrus,gpio-indv-pol. This value is ignored if cirrus,gpio-indv-enable does
    not specify that GPIO4 is enabled.

  - cirrus,gpio-indv-enable : Bit mask for enabling any of the GPIO1, GPIO2,
    GPIO3 or GPIO4 pins individually. Individual pins are enabled by writing
    the bitwise OR of any of the following:

    0x1 = GPIO1
    0x2 = GPIO2 (CS40L25B only)
    0x4 = GPIO3
    0x8 = GPIO4

    Enabling a pin arms the device to render playback in response to rising or
    falling edges along that pin. If cirrus,gpio-indv-pol specifies the pin as
    active high, rising edges along that pin prompt the device to exit standby
    as well as hibernation (with the exception of GPIO3). The edge sensitivity
    is inverted if cirrus,gpio-indv-pol specifies the pin as active low.

    If this value is omitted, a value of 0x1 (GPIO1 only) or 0xF (GPIO1, GPIO2,
    GPIO3 and GPIO4) is assumed for CS40L25A or CS40L25B, respectively.

    All pins enabled by cirrus,gpio-indv-enable are collectively enabled or
    disabled as a function of the mode specified by cirrus,gpio1-mode.

  - cirrus,gpio1-mode : Specifies the operating mode of the GPIO1 pin, equal to
    one of the following.

    0 = enabled by default
    1 = disabled by default
    2 = disabled by default, but automatically enabled and disabled upon suspend
        and resume, respectively

    If this value is omitted or given an invalid value, mode 0 (enabled by
    default) is assumed. Regardless of mode, the GPIO1 pin can be enabled or
    disabled at will from user space using the gpio1_enable sysfs control.

    The behavior specified for GPIO1 applies to any additional GPIO2, GPIO3 or
    GPIO4 pins enabled by cirrus,gpio-indv-enable.

  - cirrus,gpio-indv-pol : Bit mask for specifying active-low polarity for any
    of the GPIO1, GPIO2, GPIO3 or GPIO4 pins individually. Individual pins are
    made active low by writing the bitwise OR of any of the following:

    0x1 = GPIO1
    0x2 = GPIO2
    0x4 = GPIO3 (standby only)
    0x8 = GPIO4

    If this value is omitted, a value of 0x0 (all active high) is assumed.

  - cirrus,hiber-enable : Boolean for instructing the device to enter and exit
    hibernation mode upon suspend and resume, respectively. Hibernation mode is
    supported by silicon revision B1 only. If this property is omitted, the
    device remains in standby and automatic entry into hibernation mode is
    effectively disabled.

  - cirrus,asp-bclk-freq-hz : Specifies the frequency (in Hz) of the ASP_BCLK
    pin (CS40L25A only). If this value is omitted, ASP support is disabled.

  - cirrus,asp-bclk-inv : Boolean to specify that the ASP_BCLK pin is inverted
    relative to that which is defined for cirrus,asp-fmt (CS40L25A only).

  - cirrus,asp-fsync-inv : Boolean to specify that the ASP_FSYNC pin is inverted
    relative to that which is defined for cirrus,asp-fmt (CS40L25A only).

  - cirrus,asp-fmt : Specifies the interface format of the ASP, equal to one of
    the following (refer to the device's data sheet for more information).

    0 = TDM 1
    1 = Reserved
    2 = I2S
    3 = Reserved
    4 = TDM 1.5

    If this value is omitted, I2S is assumed.

  - cirrus,asp-slot-num : ASP slot number (CS40L25A only) relative to the start
    of the frame (0 through 63). If this value is omitted, slot 0 is assumed.

  - cirrus,asp-slot-width : ASP slot width (CS40L25A only), specified in bits
    (12 through 128). If this value is omitted, ASP support is disabled.

  - cirrus,asp-samp-width : ASP sample width (CS40L25A only), specified in bits
    (12 through 24). If this value is omitted, ASP support is disabled.

  - cirrus,asp-timeout : Specifies the minimum number of milliseconds to pause
    ASP playback following haptic playback interruption (CS40L25A only). If this
    value is omitted or exceeds the maximum permitted delay (10 seconds), the
    timeout is effectively disabled.

  - cirrus,amp-gnd-stby : Boolean to specify that the OUT+ and OUT- pins are to
    remain grounded during the standby state. In this case, the latency of I2C-
    triggered playback is increased by that of a single I2C write transaction
    and GPIO-triggered playback is unavailable.

    If this property is omitted or the device's interrupt (/ALERT) pin is not
    available, the OUT+ and OUT- pins remain high-impedance during the standby
    state (default case) and neither I2C-triggered nor GPIO-triggered playback
    are affected.

    Starting with firmware revision 8.7.0, OUT+ and OUT- pin state control is
    deferred to the DSP such that neither I2C-triggered nor GPIO-triggered
    playback are affected even if cirrus,amp-gnd-stby is specified.

  - cirrus,boost-ctl-millivolt : Maximum target voltage to which the class H
    algorithm may increase the VBST supply, expressed in mV. Valid values range
    from 2550 to 11000 (inclusive) in steps of 50. If this value is specified as
    zero or VP rises above this value, VBST is bypassed to VP. If this value is
    omitted, the maximum target voltage remains at 11 V.

  - cirrus,boost-clab-millivolt : Voltage closed-loop active-breaking, expressed
    in mV. Valid values range from 2550 to 11000 (inclusive) in steps of 50. If
    this value is omitted, then the target voltage will be 11V.

  - cirrus,boost-ovp-millivolt : Nominal VBST overvoltage protection threshold,
    expressed in mV. Valid values range from 9000 to 12875 (inclusive) in steps
    of 125. If this value is omitted, the threshold remains at 12 V.

  - cirrus,vpbr-enable : Boolean for enabling VP brownout prevention. If this
    property is omitted, VP brownout prevention remains disabled unless it is
    enabled through a cirrus,vpbr-config child node.

    This property remains available for backwards compatibility and need not be
    specified if a cirrus,vpbr-config child node is present and cirrus,br-enable
    is already specified within the child node.

  - cirrus,vpbr-thld1-millivolt : Initial VP brownout prevention threshold,
    expressed in mV. Valid values range from 2497 to 3874 (inclusive). The value
    written to the device is quantized in steps of approximately 48 mV. If this
    value is omitted, the threshold remains at 2.639 V.

    This property remains available for backwards compatibility and need not be
    specified if a cirrus,vpbr-config child node is present and cirrus,br-thld1
    is already specified within the child node. If both are present, however,
    cirrus,vpbr-thld1-millivolt takes priority.

  - cirrus,vbbr-enable : Boolean for enabling VBST brownout prevention. If this
    property is omitted, VBST brownout prevention remains disabled unless it is
    enabled through a cirrus,vbbr-config child node.

    This property remains available for backwards compatibility and need not be
    specified if a cirrus,vbbr-config child node is present and cirrus,br-enable
    is already specified within the child node.

  - cirrus,vbbr-thld1-millivolt : Initial VBST brownout prevention threshold,
    expressed in mV. Valid values range from 109 to 3445 (inclusive). The value
    written to the device is quantized in steps of approximately 55 mV. If this
    value is omitted, the threshold remains at 0.273 V. This threshold is
    interpreted as the difference between the target VBST level and the actual
    measured VBST level.

    This property remains available for backwards compatibility and need not be
    specified if a cirrus,vbbr-config child node is present and cirrus,br-thld1
    is already specified within the child node. If both are present, however,
    cirrus,vbbr-thld1-millivolt takes priority.

  - cirrus,fw-id-remap : Alternative firmware build ID (silicon revision B1
    only), equal to one of the following.

    0x1400C3: cs40l25a.wmfw
    0x1400CB: cs40l25a_clab.wmfw

    If this value is omitted, an ID of 0x1400C3 is assumed.

  - cirrus,auto-recovery : Boolean for enabling auto-recovery mode, wherein the
    driver checks for inadvertent device reset prior to administering I2C-
    triggered playback. If the driver determines the device's register map has
    been compromised, the driver issues a full device reset and restores the
    device to its previous state.

    Auto-recovery mode increases the latency of I2C-triggered playback by that
    of a single I2C read transaction. If this property is omitted, auto-recovery
    mode remains disabled and I2C-triggered playback is unaffected.

  - cirrus,cond-classh : Boolean for enabling conditional classh. This will
    keep classh enabled unless a clab waveform is triggered. Otherwise, classh
    will be disabled unless data is streamed to the ASP port.

Optional properties for VP (cirrus,vpbr-config) and VBST (cirrus,vbbr-config)
brownout prevention child nodes:

  - cirrus,br-enable: Boolean for enabling brownout prevention.

  - cirrus,br-thld1: Value to be used for the VPBR_THLD1/VBBR_THLD1 register
    field (see the CS40L25/B data sheet for more information). If this property
    is omitted, a value of zero is assumed. Note that this field is interpreted
    differently between VP and VBST brownout prevention.

  - cirrus,br-max-att: Value to be used for the VPBR_MAX_ATT/VBBR_MAX_ATT
    register field (see the CS40L25/B data sheet for more information). If this
    property is omitted, a value of zero is assumed.

  - cirrus,br-atk-vol: Value to be used for the VPBR_ATK_VOL/VBBR_ATK_VOL
    register field (see the CS40L25/B data sheet for more information). If this
    property is omitted, a value of zero is assumed.

  - cirrus,br-atk-rate: Value to be used for the VPBR_ATK_RATE/VBBR_ATK_RATE
    register field (see the CS40L25/B data sheet for more information). If this
    property is omitted, a value of zero is assumed.

  - cirrus,br-wait: Value to be used for the VPBR_WAIT/VBBR_WAIT register field
    (see the CS40L25/B data sheet for more information). If this property is
    omitted, a value of zero is assumed.

  - cirrus,br-rel-rate: Value to be used for the VPBR_REL_RATE/VBBR_REL_RATE
    register field (see the CS40L25/B data sheet for more information). If this
    property is omitted, a value of zero is assumed.

  - cirrus,br-mute-enable: Boolean to specify that the output shall be muted
    if VPBR_MAX_ATT/VBBR_MAX_ATT is reached during the attack state in the
    continued presence of a brownout condition.

  - cirrus,dcm-disable: Boolean to disable DCM automatic low power mode in
    favor of CCM mode for specific hardware configurations.

Examples:

  cs40l20: cs40l20@43 {
    compatible = "cirrus,cs40l20";
    reg = <0x43>;
    reset-gpios = <&gpio0 54 0>;
    VA-supply = <&dummy_vreg>;
    VP-supply = <&dummy_vreg>;
    cirrus,boost-ind-nanohenry = <1000>;
    cirrus,boost-cap-microfarad = <4>;
    cirrus,boost-ipk-milliamp = <4500>;
    cirrus,refclk-gpio2;
  };

  cs40l25a: cs40l25a@43 {
    compatible = "cirrus,cs40l25a";
    reg = <0x43>;
    reset-gpios = <&gpio0 54 0>;
    interrupt-parent = <&gpio0>;
    interrupts = <55 8>;
    VA-supply = <&dummy_vreg>;
    VP-supply = <&dummy_vreg>;
    cirrus,boost-ind-nanohenry = <1000>;
    cirrus,boost-cap-microfarad = <4>;
    cirrus,boost-ipk-milliamp = <4500>;
    cirrus,asp-bclk-freq-hz = <1536000>;
    cirrus,asp-slot-width = <16>;
    cirrus,asp-samp-width = <16>;
  };
